Bootiful microservices with Spring Boot (#1449)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2023-09-15-java-spring-boot-microservices.md

**Table of Contents**{: .hide }
* Table of Contents
{:toc}

## Create Java Microservices with Spring Boot and Spring Cloud

I like to show developers how to build everything from scratch. Today, I'm going to take a different approach. First, I'll show you how to get the completed example working. Then, I'll explain how I created everything and the trials and tribulations I encountered along the way.

You can start by cloning the [@oktadev/auth0-java-microservices-examples](https://github.com/oktadev/auth0-java-microservices-examples) repository.

```shell
git clone https://github.com/oktadev/auth0-java-microservices-examples.git
cd auth0-java-microservices-examples/spring-boot-gateway-webflux
```

In the `spring-boot-gateway-webflux` directory, there are three projects:

* **discovery-service**: a Netflix Eureka server used for service discovery.
* **car-service**: a simple Car Service that uses Spring Data REST to serve up a REST API of cars.
* **api-gateway**: an API gateway with a `/cool-cars` endpoint that talks to the car service and filters out cars that aren't cool (in my opinion, of course).

### Run a Secure Spring Boot Microservice Architecture

> To run the example, you must [install the Auth0 CLI](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli#installation) and create an Auth0 account. If you don't have an Auth0 account, [sign up for free](https://auth0.com/signup). I recommend using [SDKMAN!](https://sdkman.io) to install Java 17+.

Reviewer: would be nice to mention HTTPie also here since its used later and someone could be confused

> To run the example, you must [install the Auth0 CLI](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli#installation) and create an Auth0 account. If you don't have an Auth0 account, [sign up for free](https://auth0.com/signup). I recommend using [SDKMAN!](https://sdkman.io) to install Java 17+.

Author: ```suggestion
To run the example, you must [install the Auth0 CLI](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli#installation) and create an Auth0 account. If you don't have an Auth0 account, [sign up for free](https://auth0.com/signup). I recommend using [SDKMAN!](https://sdkman.io) to install Java 17+ and [HTTPie](https://httpie.io/download) for making HTTP requests.
```

First, start the discovery service:

```shell
cd discovery-service

> ./gradlew bootRun

Reviewer 2: The app runs without the auth0 config, but I see the exception:
```
023-09-26T20:34:59.541-03:00  INFO 23615 --- [           main] c.n.d.s.t.d.RedirectingEurekaHttpClient  : Request execution error. endpoint=DefaultEndpoint{ serviceUrl='http://localhost:8761/eureka/}, exception=java.net.ConnectException: Connection refused stacktrace=jakarta.ws.rs.ProcessingException: java.net.ConnectException: Connection refused
```

Is it expected? I would not run it until configured.

Author: Yes, I see this. It is not expected. Great catch! Funny enough, it was suggested by GitHub Copilot, and I ignored it. Fixed in https://github.com/oktadev/auth0-java-microservices-examples/commit/ecfca076a0c0a275209314e00d500bbbc105f863.

```

> Before it starts, you'll need to configure the API gateway to use your Auth0 account.

Reviewer 2: Before which one starts? I am missing something

Author: Added a suggestion to fix.

> Before it starts, you'll need to configure the API gateway to use your Auth0 account.

Author: ```suggestion
Before you can start the API gateway project, you'll need to configure the API gateway to use your Auth0 account.
```

  --logout-urls http://localhost:8080 \
  --reveal-secrets
```

Copy `api-gateway/.env.example` to `.env` and edit it to contain the values from the command above.

```dotenv
OKTA_OAUTH2_ISSUER=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
OKTA_OAUTH2_CLIENT_ID=
OKTA_OAUTH2_CLIENT_SECRET=
OKTA_OAUTH2_AUDIENCE=https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/
```

At startup, these properties will be read using [spring-dotenv](https://github.com/paulschwarz/spring-dotenv).

Run `./gradlew bootRun` to start the API gateway, or use your IDE to run it.

Copy `car-service/.env.example` to `.env` and update its values.

```dotenv
OKTA_OAUTH2_ISSUER=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
OKTA_OAUTH2_AUDIENCE=https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/
```

Start it with `./gradlew bootRun` and open `http://localhost:8080` in your favorite browser. You'll be redirected to Auth0 to log in.

{% img blog/spring-boot-microservices/auth0-login.png alt:"Auth0 Login" %}{: .center-image }

After authenticating, you'll see your name in lights! ✨

{% img blog/spring-boot-microservices/name-in-lights.png alt:"Your name in lights" %}{: .center-image }

You can navigate to the following URLs in your browser for different results:

> - `http://localhost:8080/print-token`: prints access token to the console

Author: ```suggestion
- `http://localhost:8080/print-token`: prints access token to the terminal
```

- `http://localhost:8080/cool-cars`: returns a list of cool cars

> - `http://localhost:8080/home`: proxies request to the car service and prints JWT claims to the console

Reviewer 2: I got confused on where to look. I might say "terminal" instead of console, as it was used before. Also for /home, I would say it prints in the car-service terminal, I was looking at the api-gateway terminal.

Author: Please let me know if the suggested change works for you.

Reviewer 2: It works

> - `http://localhost:8080/home`: proxies request to the car service and prints JWT claims to the console

Author: ```suggestion
- `http://localhost:8080/home`: proxies request to the car service and prints JWT claims in this application's terminal
```

Reviewer: this suggestion is disabled for some reason

Author: @deepu105 Do you agree I should change it, or do you think we should change it to something else?

Okta also now has an [Okta Spring Boot starter](https://github.com/okta/okta-spring-boot). I didn't use it in my first experiment, but I'm a big fan of it after the last few years! It dramatically simplifies configuration and makes securing your apps with OAuth 2.0 and OIDC easy. It's a thin wrapper around Spring Security's resource server, OAuth client, and OIDC features. Not only that, but it works with Okta Workforce Identity, Okta Customer Identity (aka Auth0), and even Keycloak.

I created all of these applications using [start.spring.io](https://start.spring.io)'s REST API and [HTTPie](https://httpie.org).

```shell

> https start.spring.io/starter.zip bootVersion==3.1.4 \

Reviewer: bootVersion is not required IMO. I removed them in the workshop

Author: It isn't, but things might stop working with Spring Boot 3.2 because they sometimes break backward compatibility. I requested start.spring.io make things easier: https://github.com/spring-io/start.spring.io/issues/1303 I'd appreciate an upvote!

  artifactId==discovery-service name==eureka-service \
  dependencies==cloud-eureka-server baseDir==discovery-service | tar -xzvf -

> https start.spring.io/starter.zip bootVersion==3.1.4 \

Reviewer: you had issues with file permission right? can you try `start.spring.io/starter.tgz` instead of `zip` and see if you still have file permission issues?

Author: You are right! If I use `.tgz`, the `chmod` is unnecessary. We should update this post and our workshop.

  artifactId==car-service name==car-service baseDir==car-service \
  dependencies==actuator,cloud-eureka,data-jpa,data-rest,postgresql,web,validation,devtools,docker-compose,okta | tar -xzvf -

https start.spring.io/starter.zip bootVersion==3.1.4 \
  artifactId==api-gateway name==api-gateway baseDir==api-gateway \
  dependencies==cloud-eureka,cloud-feign,data-rest,web,okta | tar -xzvf -
```` 

You might notice the `api-gateway` project doesn't have `cloud-gateway` as a dependency. That's because I started without it and didn't add it until I needed to proxy requests by path.

After creating these three projects, I ran `chmod +x gradlew` in each directory to make the Gradle wrapper executable.

## Service Discovery with Netflix Eureka

The `discovery-service` is configured the same as you would most Eureka servers. It has an `@EnableEurekaServer` annotation on its main class and properties that set its port and turn off discovery.

```properties
server.port=8761

> eureka.client.register-with-eureka=false

Reviewer: In workshop there is also `eureka.client.fetch-registry=false`

Author: Good catch!

> eureka.client.register-with-eureka=false

Author: ```suggestion
eureka.client.register-with-eureka=false
eureka.client.fetch-registry=false
```

```

The `car-service` and `api-gateway` projects are configured similarly. Both have a unique name defined, and `car-service` is configured to run on port `8090` so it doesn't conflict with `8080`.

`car-service/src/main/resources/application.properties`
```properties
server.port=8090
spring.application.name=car-service
```

`api-gateway/src/main/resources/application.properties`
```properties
spring.application.name=api-gateway
```

> `@EnableDiscoveryClient` annotates the main class in both projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`@EnableDiscoveryClient` annotates the main class in both car service and API gateway.
```

```groovy
implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-data-rest'
implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-web'
implementation 'org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-starter-openfeign'
```

And add Spring Cloud Gateway with Resilience4j dependencies:

```groovy
implementation 'org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-starter-circuitbreaker-reactor-resilience4j'
implementation 'org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-starter-gateway'
```

Then, I moved `CoolCarController` to its own class and re-implemented it with WebClient.

```java
package com.example.apigateway.web;

import org.slf4j.Logger;
import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory;
import org.springframework.cloud.client.circuitbreaker.ReactiveCircuitBreaker;
import org.springframework.cloud.client.circuitbreaker.ReactiveCircuitBreakerFactory;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.GetMapping;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RestController;
import org.springframework.web.reactive.function.client.WebClient;
import reactor.core.publisher.Flux;

@RestController
class CoolCarController {

    Logger log = LoggerFactory.getLogger(CoolCarController.class);

>     private final WebClient.Builder webClientBuilder;

Reviewer: I think worth mentioneing that a bean needs to be configured for this to work

Author: I'll add this in a commit since I can't do code inside a suggestion.

Author: Added below.

                             ReactiveCircuitBreakerFactory circuitBreakerFactory) {
        this.webClientBuilder = webClientBuilder;
        this.circuitBreaker = circuitBreakerFactory.create("circuit-breaker");
    }

    record Car(String name) {
    }

    @GetMapping("/cool-cars")
    public Flux<Car> coolCars() {
        return circuitBreaker.run(
            webClientBuilder.build()
                .get().uri("http://car-service/cars")
                .retrieve().bodyToFlux(Car.class)
                .filter(this::isCool),
            throwable -> {
                log.warn("Error making request to car service", throwable);
                return Flux.empty();
            });
    }

    private boolean isCool(Car car) {
        return !car.name().equals("AMC Gremlin") &&
            !car.name().equals("Triumph Stag") &&
            !car.name().equals("Ford Pinto") &&
            !car.name().equals("Yugo GV");
    }
}
```

In the `car-service` project, I had to switch from using Spring Data REST to handling it with a `@RestController` and `@GetMapping` annotation. I removed the `@RepositoryRestResource` annotation from `CarRepository` and added a `CarController` class.

> 

Reviewer 2: I can't figure out yet why you had to modify the car service.

Author: Because I was originally using `@RepositoryRestResource` on the repository, and it returns an `_embedded` element with the list of cars in there. I could not figure out how to get `WebClient` to parse it correctly. It worked fine with OpenFeight.

Reviewer 2: I would add a note about that. Might be related to configuring [WebClient to speak hypermedia](https://docs.spring.io/spring-hateoas/docs/current/reference/html/#client.web-client) and 
["Spring Data Rest uses HAL to render responses"](https://docs.spring.io/spring-data/rest/docs/current/reference/html/#repository-resources.resource-discoverability)

Author: I didn't know changing the web client was this easy! Let me try it.

Author: I tried it and it doesn't work. As soon as I add `spring-boot-starter-hateoas` to the `build.gradle` in the API gateway project, it fails to start with:

```
Parameter 0 of constructor in com.example.apigateway.config.SecurityConfiguration required a bean of type 'org.springframework.security.oauth2.client.registration.ReactiveClientRegistrationRepository' that could not be found.

Action:

Consider defining a bean of type 'org.springframework.security.oauth2.client.registration.ReactiveClientRegistrationRepository' in your configuration.
```

If I remove the dependency, everything works. Here's the dependency coordinates:

```groovy
implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-hateoas'
```

Author: You can see my attempt in https://github.com/oktadev/auth0-java-microservices-examples/pull/7

Author: Added an issue to the Okta Spring Boot starter: https://github.com/okta/okta-spring-boot/issues/607

Author: Added note inline to address this issue.

Reviewer 2: I just read the doc mentions [Spring MVC](https://docs.spring.io/spring-hateoas/docs/current/reference/html/) but not reactive, could be related.

```java
package com.example.carservice.web;

import com.example.carservice.data.Car;
import com.example.carservice.data.CarRepository;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.GetMapping;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RestController;

import java.util.List;

@RestController
class CarController {

    private final CarRepository repository;

    public CarController(CarRepository repository) {
        this.repository = repository;
    }

    @GetMapping("/cars")
    public List<Car> getCars() {
        return repository.findAll();
    }
}
```

> To proxy `/home` to the downstream microservice, I added a `api-gateway/src/main/resources/application.yml` file to configure Spring Cloud Gateway to enable service discovery and specify routes.

Author: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: I did try to use Spring HATEOAS but [ran into an issue](https://github.com/okta/okta-spring-boot/issues/607) when using it with the Okta Spring Boot starter. 

To proxy `/home` to the downstream microservice, I added a `api-gateway/src/main/resources/application.yml` file to configure Spring Cloud Gateway to enable service discovery and specify routes.
```

package com.example.apigateway.web;

import org.springframework.security.core.annotation.AuthenticationPrincipal;
import org.springframework.security.oauth2.client.OAuth2AuthorizedClient;
import org.springframework.security.oauth2.client.annotation.RegisteredOAuth2AuthorizedClient;
import org.springframework.security.oauth2.core.oidc.user.OidcUser;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.GetMapping;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RestController;

@RestController
class HomeController {

    @GetMapping("/")
    public String howdy(@AuthenticationPrincipal OidcUser user) {
        return "Hello, " + user.getFullName();
    }

    @GetMapping("/print-token")
    public String printAccessToken(@RegisteredOAuth2AuthorizedClient("okta")
                                   OAuth2AuthorizedClient authorizedClient) {

        var accessToken = authorizedClient.getAccessToken();

        System.out.println("Access Token Value: " + accessToken.getTokenValue());
        System.out.println("Token Type: " + accessToken.getTokenType().getValue());
        System.out.println("Expires At: " + accessToken.getExpiresAt());

        return "Access token printed";
    }
}
```

> Using jwt.io, I verified that it wasn't a valid JWT. I thought about trying to implement Spring Security's [opaque token support](http://developer.okta.com/blog/2020/08/07/spring-boot-remote-vs-local-tokens), but discovered Auth0 [doesn't have an `/instropection` endpoint](https://community.auth0.com/t/introspection-endpoint-for-opaque-tokens-or-more-flexible-rules-to-get-clear-jwt-access-token/63866). This makes it impossible to use opaque tokens with Auth0.

Reviewer: may be we should get this clarified with someone. I'm hoping there would be some way to use opaque tokens

Author: I'll send you a link to a discussion on Slack.

    }

    @Bean
    public SecurityWebFilterChain filterChain(ServerHttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
        http
            .authorizeExchange(authz -> authz
                .anyExchange().authenticated()
            )
            .oauth2Login(oauth2 -> oauth2
                .authorizationRequestResolver(
                    authorizationRequestResolver(this.clientRegistrationRepository)
                )
            );
        return http.build();
    }

    private ServerOAuth2AuthorizationRequestResolver authorizationRequestResolver(
        ReactiveClientRegistrationRepository clientRegistrationRepository) {

        var authorizationRequestResolver =
            new DefaultServerOAuth2AuthorizationRequestResolver(clientRegistrationRepository);
        authorizationRequestResolver.setAuthorizationRequestCustomizer(
            authorizationRequestCustomizer());

        return authorizationRequestResolver;
    }

    private Consumer<OAuth2AuthorizationRequest.Builder> authorizationRequestCustomizer() {
        return customizer -> customizer
            .additionalParameters(params -> params.put("audience", audience));
    }
}
```

> I was able to get the OpenFeign client to work by adding a couple of properties to enable OAuth:

Reviewer 2: I understood you removed feign?

Author: Yes. This is a weird entry, I'll admit. I figured out how to get OpenFeign working with OAuth before I got Spring Cloud Gateway working. 

Do you think I should move this section up or eliminate it altogether? I can also just mention it and link to the branch. https://github.com/oktadev/auth0-java-microservices-examples/pull/2

Once Spring Cloud Gateway has MVC support, I plan to create a new example in the repo and update this post.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if I understand the phrase, is it with or without `spring-cloud-starter-gateway`? Maybe mention it at the end of the section, before the refresh tokens subtitle, and link to the branch as you said. I would say (if correct) "I was able to get the initial `api-gateway` version (with Spring Cloud OpenFeign) working with OAuth ....

Author: I added your suggestion. However, I might've misunderstood. Are you saying I should move to to its own section. If so, that makes sense. Once the MVC version of Spring Cloud Gateway comes out (in Spring Boot 3.2), I plan to update this post and have two sections for MVC and for WebFlux.

Reviewer: imo this might just confuse people so probably better to just remove now and add later when using boot 3.2

Author: I'll comment it out so I remember how to do it.

Author: Commented out in https://github.com/oktadev/okta-blog/pull/1449/commits/808e453bd7a6f49d63c8254c89040651fa781fd6.

> I was able to get the OpenFeign client to work by adding a couple of properties to enable OAuth:

Author: ```suggestion
I was able to get the initial API gateway app (with Spring Cloud OpenFeign) working with OAuth before I added Spring Cloud Gateway:
```

```properties
spring.cloud.openfeign.oauth2.enabled=true
spring.cloud.openfeign.oauth2.clientRegistrationId=okta
```

> To make Spring Cloud Gateway pass the access token downstream, I added `TokenRelay` to its default filters in `application.yml`:

Reviewer: btw any specific reason to use both yaml and prop file, instead just one?

Author: I would've used only a properties file, but I was unable to figure out the syntax and a lot of the examples in docs use YAML.

```yaml
spring:
  cloud:
    gateway:
      discovery:
        locator:
          enabled: true
      default-filters:
        - TokenRelay
      routes: ...
```

> I added a `WebClientConfiguration` class to configure `WebClient` to include the access token with its requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I updated the `WebClientConfiguration` class to configure `WebClient` to include the access token with its requests.
```
since this is required earlier on

> One reasonable argument we've heard is that you shouldn't start with a microservices architecture. Instead begin with a monolith, keep it modular, and split it into microservices once the monolith becomes a problem.

The Java ecosystem has some well-established patterns for developing microservice architectures. If you're familiar with Spring, you'll feel right at home developing with Spring Boot and Spring Cloud. Since that's one of the quickest ways to get started, I figured I'd walk you through a quick example.

This example contains a microservice with a REST API that returns a list of cool cars. It uses Netflix Eureka for service discovery, WebClient for remote communication, and Spring Cloud Gateway to route requests to the microservice. It integrates Spring Security and OAuth 2.0, so only authenticated users can access the API gateway and microservice. It also uses Resilience4j to add fault tolerance to the gateway.

> {% img blog/spring-boot-microservices/spring-cloud-gateway-with-cars.png alt:"Spring Boot Microservices" %}{: .center-image }

Author: todo: change graphic to use Auth0 by Okta and new logo.
